---
title: "When Do Nondemocracies Legalise Online Information Control?"
collection: workingpapers
category: manuscripts 
date: 2025-10-01
type: 'Working Paper'
---

**Abstract:** Laws that restrict media and freedom of speech communicate important messages about the logic of state repression. In some instances, legal instruments legitimise repression by making the punishment of dissent appear procedural and fair. In others, they expose the state's coercive nature by illustrating the consequences imposed on those who defy the regime. This study investigates under what conditions nondemocratic regimes employ legal mechanisms to enforce information control in the digital sphere. I argue that nondemocratic incumbents employ legal mechanisms to exert control as part of a strategic trade-off between containing dissent and maintaining a façade of legitimacy. On the one hand, the legal regulation of the online information environment enables incumbents to secure ex ante agreements among elite actors. Laws then become regularised and credible outcomes of competing preferences, reducing the risk that authoritarian elites with divergent interests will later challenge the state. On the other hand, when authorities seek to suppress online opposition through broadly worded Internet legislation, they mask their repressive intentions in the language of law to obscure the nature of their actions and minimise the risk of backlash from state challengers. I contend that the likelihood of nondemocratic regimes adopting legal instruments for information control is shaped by the relative strength of nominally democratic institutions within the state, and only when these institutions retain some autonomy can they lend credibility and legitimacy to repressive actions. This study advances our understanding of legal repression in contemporary autocracies and sheds light on authoritarian information control in the digital age.
